view by Edgar 06/13/2019
NEBRASKA DRY BEAN COMMISSION
PROGRESS REPORT


For magazine

Title of Project: Examining the fungal rhizobiome associated with resilient dry beans bred for changing climate conditions in Western Nebraska.
Investigators: G. Godoy- Lutz, J. R. Steadman, A. Mitra and C. Urrea ,  J.R.Steadman PI.  Plant Pathology Department    jsteadman1@unl.edu, G.Godoy-Lutz, Co-PI (visiting scientist) Plant Pathology Dept. ggodoy2@unl.edu,  and  C.Urrea Co-PI Agronomy Dept. currea2@unl.edu

Dry beans grown in Western Nebraska are an important crop for export and consumption. The Nebraska bean industry (NBI) generates over $ 100 million locally and an export value of $ 41 million yearly. To remain competitive the NBI needs to reduce vulnerability to the effects of changing climate which may increase the cost of production and lower yields due to increased environmental stresses such as drought, heat, soil erosion and salinity and emergence of new pests and diseases. It is predicted that grain production in the Midwest will be more sensitive to variable weather such as warmer winters, heat waves and hot summer nights. In Nebraska, temperature is predicted to increase at 0.5-1.25 degrees per decade and rainfall will be reduced 5-15% consequently influencing plant growth and development. To address these demands and negative impact, we will need to modify management strategies, and adopt more sustainable practices to minimize impact from pests and diseases. Breeding beans for resilience to drought, heat stress and root rots requires a healthy root as well as rhizobiome (root -associated microbes) relationships, beneficial for plant health and productivity. The aim of this project is to study the natural population of fungal Arbuscular Mycorrhizae (AM), which are a kind of rhizobiome with multiple benefits ranging from nutrient uptake, disease protection and tolerance to salinity. In addition, bean lines with advantageous root traits to promote beneficial associations with AM that counteract biotic constraints prevalent in Western Nebraska soils.  In 2018, we sampled twelve bean lines (six Pinto and six Great Northern) to determine taxonomic identification and quantification of AM associated with healthy bean roots plants grown in replicated trials of the PHREC Dry Bean program in Mitchell and Scottsbluff.  Since AM are difficult to isolate and quantify, we used a DNA technology called as the Illumina platform, which allows the simultaneous sequencing of microbial communities, in this case the AM occupying a particular niche in roots. We identified five distinct species including other unknown species of the genus Glomus. There were significant differences among bean lines and locations for some species groups and unique individuals of AM were associated with Pinto and Great Northern lines for each location. This finding supports the proliferation of new fungal genotypes adapted to the bean crop.  AM are favorable to the plants since they develop symbiosis ( when a plant root and fungus develop a mutual beneficial interaction) using structures within the roots known as arbuscules. The arbuscules are the site for water uptake as well as for transfer of nutrients such as phosphate, nitrogen sulfur and micro minerals (copper, zinc and iron) promoting soil fertility. Other benefits such as tolerance to heavy metals and saline conditions as well as protection against root rots and nematodes are well documented in the literature.   Because of their ability to mobilize phosphorous from phosphate rock in alkaline soils, AM stimulate the development of nitrogen-fixing bacteria that require large amounts of P for reproduction and nodule formation, required to establish the bacteria. In addition, the hyphal networks of AM fungi improve soil characters such as soil particle aggregation, thereby improving the resistance to erosion by wind and water.  Therefore, any production system that promotes AM –bean symbiosis would be favorable for Panhandle soils, which are extremely low in organic matter, and high in pH and alkalinity. 
In our study, we also screened selected bean lines from the PHREC Dry bean program to look at root traits that promote AM root association. The best performers were Great Northern NE2-18-48 and NE2-17-40 (NZ7) and Pinto NE1-17-9 (NZ1), NE1-17-36 (Chile 13), NE1-17-29 (NZ3), NE1-17-43 (NZ4), NE1-17-21 (NZ2), and NE1-17-27 (Chile 12).  
Determining the extent of bean –AM symbiosis is important to obtain basic information about the natural population so that new bean lines can develop symbiosis. With the aid of improved laboratory methods we can isolate prevalent AM species to test with conventionally bred or gene edited bean lines for their capacity to improve symbiosis




